# Rough Draft – Physical vs Logical Storage Article

This is the original rough draft written before editing and formatting the final article. It is included to document the writing process and show how the ideas developed during research.

---

In digital forensics, knowing how data is stored in a storage device will help determine how you will go about recovering a file. Here I will be sharing what I learned about physical storage and logical storage. First I will start with how a file is stored. Once we understand how data is stored, we will then go into how that data can be extracted to reconstruct a file. Lastly, we will go over how this all plays out in court when you present your finding.

We will go over how data is stored in both a HDD and a SDD. Data can be stored in other devices such as a usb but that is a topic for another article. To keep it simple, the data from files are stored in the physical storage in a storage device; sectors for HHD, pages for SSD. We will first focus on HDD These sectors and pages are a fixed sized (512kb sectors for example). Data from Smaller files take up less space and may only have to use less sectors but data from larger files take up more space in thus more sectors. When a file uses multiple sectors, the filesystem has to keep track of what sectors belong to a file. This is where logical storage comes in. Logical storages groups sectors into clusters and keeps track of what clusters belong to which file using metadata. Metadata can be described as data that describes data. I like to think about it as the filters we use when we are shopping online. Instead of looking at all these different types of shoes, maybe I want to narrow it down to a certain brand and size. Now, It would be ideal if these clusters were stored close to each other for convenience sake but often times they are spaced out throughout the disk, a process called fragmentation. This happens as the disk fills up and free space become less available forcing the file system to take whatever space is available kinda like finding a spot to park in a busy parking lot; we often aim for the closest spot but if not available then we take whatever spot opens up (hopefully close) or the open spots in the back if you are like me and had bad experiences with people opening their car doors. The way the file system assigns space also contributes to fragmentation like how there may be a person who guides you to where you can park at. When the clusters are spaced out like this, the storage device has to put in more work to find the file just like how we have to walk more if we park far away. There is a way to group these cluster closer together through a process called defragmentation. Using a parking lot as an example again, think of it as rearranging all the cars so that all the cars that belong to a certain company are parked close to each other. Clusters of a file are rearranged on a disk to be close to each other. This creates less work for the read/write head of a hdd because it doesn't have to hop all around the disk. When a file is deleted, the space is took up is free to use.

Data stored in SDD follow a similar pattern as well with a few differences. There is still a physical and logical aspect to it. As mention before, data is stored in pages(~to sectors) and the pages are grouped to together to form blocks(~to cluster). Files often take up multiple blocks so the file system needs to track what blocks belong to what file using metadata as well. Instead of defrag, SSDs use TRIM and wear-leveling to manage the space on the drive. TRIM mark blocks as invalid and is later deleted while wear-leveling spread data across blocks so that one block isn't overused and breaks. Think of it as having one huge project you gotta do; instead of doing it all in one day which could fry your brain, you spread it out across different days (hopefully).

Now that we got the gist of how data is stored, let's look into how we can use this knowledge in Digital Forensics. When a file is deleted, the data for the file is actually not gone. The pointers of all the sectors that belong to the file are gone. It's like losing your car keys; you know it is here somewhere but you just can't remember where. When a file is deleted, the space that the file took up becomes free to use. However, data from the old file still remain in that space until it is overwritten. It really just depends on how much free space is available and how it is allocated to files. File size may contribute to it but not as much as the others. If the data hasn't been overwritten, there is a chance to piece that data back together to form the deleted file. This is referred to as file carving. File carving tries to rebuild a file without having to rely on metadata. It's like trying to identify a suspect of a crime. You may not know their name but you may be able to describe what the suspect was wearing, sex, race, etc. It looks for other ways to identify what sectors belong to a file such as headers and footers. File carving works well if the sectors of the old file are close together and haven't been overwritten. It may take longer and be less effective if it is all spread apart with some sectors overwritten.

When a file is created, data from that file is stored in clusters however there still may be some left over space within the last cluster. Data from a file may take up multiple clusters but it may not use up all the space in the cluster. Remember each cluster is a fixed size so if the cluster is 4KB and the remaining data from the file only needs 2KB, the other 2KB remains free. That remaining free space is called slack space. Slack space can contain data from the old file since it hasn't been overwritten yet. This data can then be pulled to get an idea of what that old file may be about. It may not be as good as file carving but that little piece of data may be all you need to complete the puzzle.

Now let's pivot on how all of this can be used in court. The way you present your evidence depends on the type of drive. Again we will focus on HDD drives and SSD. When it comes to a HDD, it would be ideal if we could recover the whole file using file carving. However, you may not be able to recover the whole file, just some of it. That made me question whether it can be used in court as evidence since it was not complete. It turns out that you don't need to recover to full file in order for it to be used in court. Smaller files often time can be fully recovered. Files that are partially recovered may still yield some useful evidence and often times it is supported with other evidence as long as the method you use to collect these types of evidence are valid. It would be like trying to prove someone was at the crime of a scene. You may not have video or photos of the person there but you can piece together DNA evidence from fingerprints found at the scene, match footprint to the shoes the person was wearing, and even take the dirt off the bottom of the shoe and match it with the dirt at the scene of the crime. In other words, it would be nice to have evidence that clearly proves a person committed a crime but a collaboration of evidence pointing to the person is just as good.

When it comes to SSD, the method changes. It is often times harder to use file carving and slack space analysis to recover a file for a few reasons. First, if the SSD has TRIM or garbage collection active, which may often be the case, data in the blocks may be overwritten or erased faster than it would on a HDD. Second, data in the SSD are constantly being remapped increasing the likelihood for data to be overwritten. The strategy then changes from trying to recover the file to proving the file existed, showing it was open or executed, user activity, and deletion of the file.
